So in the last lecture we added some CSS styling
to our theme.
And then we called the get_sidebar() in order to create an area where users can add some widgets.
So get_sidebar() will load a file sidebar.php.
So now we need to create a sidebar and then inside sidebar.php we'll call a function that will
load the widgets in the sidebar. A sidebar in WordPress despite its name, it could be not just a sidebar.
Sidebar refers to an area where users can put widgets. It doesn't have to be an actual sidebar.
So the first thing we need to define a sidebar to place in our theme.
So let's go to lib and create a new file and call it sidebars.
And this file will define any sidebars we will place in our themes. So sidebars.php.
So open a PHP tag and let's create a new function. So "function" and than our prefix "_themename" and let's
call it  "sidebar_widgets" and then we'll hook this function to an action called
"widgets_init".
So when widgets initialize we need to run this function.
So inside this function we'll put our code to register a sidebar.
So simply call a WordPress function called "register_sidebar".
Sorry.
And it takes an array of arguments.
So the first argument is an "id" and this should be unique id for the specific sidebar.
So this is our main sidebar, right, in the blog posts page.
So let's call it "primary_sidebar".
And the second argument is a "name".
Let's also call it  "primary sidebar".
But make sure you escape any strings
as we mentioned before.
So "Primary Sidebar" and this name will appear in the admin area as we'll see in a moment.
And of course our text domain is "_themename" placeholder.
And then we have a description which will also appear in the admin area. And it should also be escaped.
So, you know, let's type any description "This sidebar
appears in the
blog posts page".
And the text domain "_themename". And then we have "before_widget" argument.
And this will be any HTML you would like to print before the widget.
So in our case we would like to wrap our widget in a SECTION tag.
And that's also an HTML5 tag.
And I think it's appropriate use for a widget.
And this takes an ID.
And it also takes the ID as a placeholder.
And WordPress will replace this placeholder by a unique ID that it will generate and we'll see this
also in a moment.
You can also give it a class, so I have a CSS class called "c-sidebar-
widget".
And also let's give it a margin
"u-margin-bottom-20".
And also it takes a placeholder.
So the second placeholder. Sorry. This is now second one. And also WordPress will replace this by unique class that it will
generate for each widget.
So it's important to put these placeholders here if you will define a custom before widget HTML.
So next we have
"after_widget" and here we just close the SECTION. We also have "before_title".
So each widget will have a title.
And "before_title" will just add some HTML before the title. So we would like maybe to add
an H5 tag to wrap the widget in. And "after_
title"
we will just close the H5 tag.
So I think that's it.
Let's now include this file and functions.php.
So
let's duplicate this line and then change it to sidebars.
Let's now go to the wp-admin page.
So I have mine opened and then in Appearance you will now have the Widgets option.
You don't have this option if you don't have any sidebars defined. So if we comment out of this line and
then we don't have it.
So now that we have sidebars defined we can now add widgets.
So go to the widget page
And now we have our sidebar where we can, you know, drag and drop widgets. So let's add some.
So
let's add a couple of them.
And add some titles.
And now we have to of course here we still have nothing.
We now need to load the sidebar in the sidebar.php file.
So how to do that?
It's very simple.
In sidebar.php let's now remove this and create a ASIDE tag with a "role" of
"complementary".
And this also is an HTML5 tag where you can use when you have some site content in your web site
like in our case sidebar, as opposed to the MAIN tag that we used in the last lecture. Let's open a PHP
tag
and all we have to do is call a function called dynamic_sidebar().
And as an argument the ID of the sidebar that we need to load.
So in our case we call this "primary-sidebar".
And that's really it.
We now have some widgets here. We just have a problem now imagine we have a sidebar but we don't have any
widgets in it. So let's remove these and then refresh.
So we have an empty space here.
So one solution to this is you can call a function called is_active_sidebar() and this will check if
a sidebar has any widgets or not.
So it takes also the ID of the sidebar to check.
And let's put this in an if condition and then open { and then
"else"
and then close the if condition.
And inside the else we can have some text like "you can add widgets here".
So this is fine. However is not a best practice.
And actually according to the latest Theme Forest requirements for a theme, you shouldn't display text like that in
your theme. If the user did not add any widgets, we should try to adapt the design in order to fill that
space.
So let's do that instead of displaying the text here, let's delete this.
And let's copy this if condition and remove from here.
And inside sidebar
let's add this if condition here.
So if the sidebar is active at this row,
else don't add anything.
So let's close the if condition.
And then we will need to, let's copy this also
to if the sidebar is not active instead of the 8 span here make it 12. Let the content take over
all the available space.
So we can open a PHP tag inside, instead of the 8 here open a PHP tag
and then do a ternary expression here.
So "is_sidebar_active"
make it 8 otherwise 12.
So as you can see now it's filling all the content. It's filling all the space available.
If we add some widgets here.
Looks we've got something wrong here.
Oh, I think we need to echo this
and that's it. Remove.
And refresh. And it's filling all the content.
So I think that's it for our sidebar. And in the next lecture let's add some other sidebars in the footer.
Let's create a footer and then we let the user add the sidebars. But this time we'll try to do it
dynamically so the user can choose how many sidebars they need in the footer.
And according to his input we will generate different numbers of sidebars.
I just forgot to mention something. Let's have some widgets here.
And refresh the page.
Remember when I told you about the unique ID that WordPress will give.
I just want to show you that.
So we have here recent posts.
And number 3.
And then a class "widget_recent_entries".
So these are what got replaced with in sidebars.
They replaced these placeholders.
So it's important to put these placeholders.